## 1.2 Reason and Faith

Although the probabilistic model outlined above provides a reasonably systematic framework for analyzing religious hypotheses, it would be entirely inappropriate to assume that theoretical conclusions of any kind (however logically sound they may be) can provide a proper foundation for religious belief.

> “Philosophical thinking can enable us to see through objections to Christian belief. ... but it rarely, if ever, propels one into a condition of faith.” William P. Alston[^13]

> “You can find truth with logic only if you have already found truth without it.” G. K. Chesterton [^14]

I am inclined to agree with Alston that religious belief is not something that can be based on formal proofs. Faith, like love, is first and foremost an experience, which is rarely (if ever) the result of careful analysis. I also consider it quite unlikely that skeptics and atheists can be swayed by argument demonstrating that religion is not inherently irrational. However, for those who believes completely separated. There are at least two reasons why this is so. To begin with, we should observe that much of what we do and desire is based on our core belief system (i.e., our *Weltbild*), which clearly includes our attitude, toward religion. In deciding between different courses of action we generally consult these beliefs, so their rationality is clearly relevant. It is difficult to envision how a distorted view of reality could be conductive to the fulfillment of our purpose, however noble these may be.

> “It is not enough to feel deeply; one must also know. Deep care without concomitant skills and knowledge leads only into enthusiasms” Michael J. Buckley[^15]

Reason also plays an important role in sustaining faith. To see this more  clearly, it is helpful to draw an analogy with the way in which we experience love. There is no doubt that philosophical arguments cannot initiate this  feeling but it is also true that love with no rational support is necessarily incomplete. Indeed, if you have no idea why you love someone, your feelings are likely to be transitory and not particularly flattering to the object of your affection. This sentiment is nicely illustrated by one of my favorite literary rejections. In Jane Austen's *Pride and Prejudice*, Elizabeth Bennett flatly turns down Mr. Darcy's offer of marriage with the question:

> “I might as well inquire ... why you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?” [^16]

If we accept, then, that religious belief cannot be disassociated from reason, this sets certain standards regarding what can be believed. It becomes impossible, for example, to allow for superstitious beliefs and practices that often accompany legitimate theological claims. And while we will argue in the following chapters that miracles may be logically possible, it would certainly not be prudent to believe every such report. Even the way in which we envision God can sometimes be thoroughly misleading and rationally unacceptable.

> “When the Christian tradition speaks of God, it does not mo" a. great big person out there somewhere, older, wiser, strong". than you and I. That is Zeus, not God.” Michael J. Himes[^17]

The fact of reconciling reason and faith is further complicated by the fact that most religious traditions entail specific beliefs that go well beyond the mere existence of God. Christians, for example, are supposed to believe in the doctrine of the Trinity, the immortal soul and the Resurrection. Teachings like this are difficult to justify on rational grounds, and incorporating them into a scientific worldview poses formidable challenges. And yet, many scientifically minded individual do believe despite the apparent  contradictions. It is therefore clearly of interest to examine whether such a position is logically defensible. A partial answer to this question may perhaps be found with the help of *decision theory*, which is an area of mathematics that deals with decision making under uncertainty. One of the most important results of this theory is that a rational course of action ought to be based not just on the probabilities of different propositions, but also on the potential rewards and penalties that are associated with them.

To illustrate this point more clearly, suppose that you have the opportunity to take a luxurious vacation on remote exotic island (all expenses paid), suppose further that the trip is scheduled at a time of year when mosquitoes are fairly active, and that the best available protection in the resort are mosquito nets on the beds. If we assume that the chances of contracting a nasty tropical disease are no more than 1%, the odds alone would suggest that there is no compelling reason not to go. In making such a decision, however, we must also compare the potential rewards of the trip with the potential dangers, and take into account the discomfort associated with malaria, dengue fever, and a host of other possible ailments. In view of these additional considerations, our decision may easily change, and we may choose to pass on the opportunity. In other words, it would be entirely rational to conclude that the possible penalties actually outweigh the seemingly low odds that one of the risks will materialize.

The line of reasoning used above can obviously be extended to religion as well, since belief in its teachings necessarily involves an irreducible element of uncertainty. Here, too, a rational choice would be one that weighs the risks and rewards, while taking into account all the relevant likelihoods. It goes without saying, of course, that this is not how such decisions are usually made. In these matters emotions and experience have far more influence than other theoretical considerations. Nevertheless, it is fair to say that decision theory can be used to justify religious beliefs after they have already been acquired. From that perspective, a believer who happens to value the potential rewards of Column Union with God far more than the risk of spending a lifetime in the service of an illusion has made a perfectly rational choice (even if she sees the odds in favor of the “religious” hypothesis as fairly low).

In examining the rationality of faith, it is also useful to recognize that spiritual development is a continuous process, which generally evolves through a number of distinct stages. In each stage our perception of religion and its doctrines is qualitatively different, becoming progressively less literal as we move to higher levels. Although it is impossible to model this process with any precision, the following hierarchy suggested by M. Scott Peck may be a helpful tool for further discussion. [^18]

1. *__The Chaotic Stage__*. This is a stage of underdeveloped spirituality, in which people are self-centered to the point where they are essentially incapable of caring for others. All very young children pass through such a stage, but there is a non-negligible number of adults who remain entrenched in it. It is quite possible for such people to be professionally successful — they can even assume prominent leadership role.
2. *__The Formal Stage__*. This level of spiritual development is characterized by belonging to a structured religious organization, typically a church. People in this stage tend to get attached to forms and rituals, often without examining their deeper meaning. The underlying belief system is taken for granted, and there is no tolerance for change or expressions of doubt.
3. *__The Skeptical Stage__*. In the skeptical stage there is a tendency to search for truth in a purely rational manner. Not surprisingly many scientists and engineers fall into this category. People in this stage often question their fundamental beliefs and are in many ways closer to secularism than to faith. Nevertheless, they can be viewed as more spiritually developed than those who remain in the formal stage.
4. *__The Mystical Stage__*. For those in Stage 3 who have devote enough time and energy to the pursuit of truth, there usually comes a point when they begin to recognize some of the limitations of the scientific method, and the  inability of reason to cope with certain fundamental questions, This is a point at which it becomes possible to return to religion, but in a very different way from the one associated with Stage 2.

> “While Stage 4 men and women enter religion in order to approach mystery, people in Stage 2, to a considerable extent, enter religion in order to escape from it.” M. Scott Peck[^19]

Although the four stages are quite different, they are not easily distinguished in practice. In moments of fear, for example, we may well return to Stage 1; at other times, the comfort and security of Stage 2 is more appealing than the cold rationality of Stage 3. What matters, however, is the predominant state of consciousness, which should presumably evolve in a way that favors the mystical stage. It is this gradual transition that leads to what I see as an ‘intelligent faith', a spirituality that includes and *transcends knowledge*.

For a scientist whose mindset revolves around reason and logic, the first step toward this “intelligent faith” usually involves the recognition that there are intrinsic limits to what is knowable. Theologians and atheists alike maintain that these constraints open the door to religious belief.

> “The limiting of reason is a faith; it is what makes the concept of faith; it is what makes the concept of faith possible” George Smith.[^20]

> “Imperfect knowledge is of the very essence of faith.”  St. Thomas Aquinas[^21]

With that in mind, a significant portion of this book is concerned with exploring the limits of science and mathematics., together with their theological and philosophical implications. A deeper understanding of chaos theory, metamathematics, quantum mechanics and relativity can be very helpful in that respect, and can provide a natural framework for speaking about the rationality of faith. In the chapters that follow, we will examine these four scientific topics in greater detail, and will outline how each of them challenges our conventional understanding of “reality.”

[^13]: William P. Alston, “A Philosopher’s Way Back to Faith,” in *God and the Philosophers*, Thomas V. Morris (Ed.), Oxford University Press, 1994.
[^14]: Quoted in: Quentin Lauer, G. K. Chesterton, *Philosopher Without a Portfolio*, Fordham University Press, 1992.
[^15]: Michael J. Buckley, *The Catholic University as Promise and Project*, Georgetown University Press, 1998.
[^16]: Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice, Penguin Books, 1994.
[^17]: Michael J. Himes, “Finding God in All Thigns: A Sacremental Worldview and Its Effects," in *As Leaven in the World: Catholic Perspective on Faith, Vocation and the Intellectual Life*, Thomas Landy (Ed.), Rowman and Littlefield, 2001.
[^18]: This categorization was proposed by M. Scott Peck, in *The Different Drum: Community Making and Peace*, Simon and Schuster, 1987
[^19]: Peck, *The Different Drum: community Making and Peace*.
[^20]: George Smith is an atheist philosopher, and author of *Atheism: The Case Against God*, Prometheus Books, 1989.
[^21]: Quoted in Brian Davies, *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion*, Oxford University Press, 1993.
