[SCU] Chaos Theory - Truth, Beauty, and the Limits of Knowledge

## Preface
> “A little philosophy inclineth a man's mind to atheism; but depth in philosophy bringeth men’s minds about to religion.” — Francis Bacon

The book that you are about to read is undoubtedly an unusual one. When it comes to writing about science and religion, the conventional wisdom has been to minimize the presentation of scientific topics as much as possible, and avoid technical descriptions like the plague. What I propose to do is rather different. The first part of the book, for example, is devoted almost exclusively to an overview of recent results in system theory, mathematics and physics, many of which will prove to be highly counterintuitive. Science and math play a prominent role even in the sections devoted to theology, aesthetics and ethics (Chapters 7 ~ 11), although here they are treated mainly as a source of analogies. Having said that, however, I should add that the “uninitiated” reader has nothing to fear. Although the book does contain some diagrams and formulae, I made a concerted effort to present the relevant concepts in a way that is accessible to a wide audience.

Whether or not I have succeeded in this endeavor is, of course, for the readers to decide. But even if I have, it still remains unclear why someone whose primary interest lies in religion or the humanities should bother to learn anything about superstrings, black holes or chaos (and other similarly esoteric scientific concepts). One of my principal objectives in this Preface will be to explain why this is important, and why such individuals should read the first six chapters of the book carefully. Having given this question a great deal of thought, I can offer at least three good reasons.

__1. Science and Theology as Potential Allies__ Contemporary skeptics have often argued that faith is incompatible with scientific knowledge, and have substantiated their claims by pointing to numerous inconsistencies and fallacies that are associated with fundamentalist views. From their perspective, religion seems to be no more than a delusion, with potentially dangerous consequences. What such critics fail to realize, however, is that these conclusions apply only to crude and simplistic interpretations of religion. Some of the claims put forth by modern theologians are, in fact, far more sophisticated, and happen to be entirely compatible with established scientific knowledge.

I would actually go a step further, and argue that building a constructive relationship between science and religion entails much more than simply avoiding contradictions. Reconciling religious teachings with existing scientific theories is clearly an important prerequisite for a meaningful dialogue, but I feel that theologians should take on an even more active ro scientific discoveries, and learn as much about them as possible. Indeed, if we wish to build bridges across the deep gulf that separates these two domains of human inquiry, we must firmly secure the foundations on both ends of the structure, and gain some familiarity with the language of the other discipline.

To get a better sense for how theology might benefit from such an approach, imagine for a moment that human knowledge is like a balloon, which is embedded in a "sea" of unknown truths. As the balloon expands, so will its contact surface with the surrounding “mystery”. When seen from a theological perspective, this metaphor suggests that the acquisition of any new knowledge must be viewed as a positive development, since it brings us a step closer to the “Ultimate Mystery”. It goes without saying, of course, that the truth essence of this successively better approximations of its character. Science can be a powerful ally to theologians in this enterprise, but only if they first gain a basic understanding of its most important results. In that respect, reading Chapter 2 – 6 of this book can prove to be helpful

__2. The “shock and Awe” Effect of Science__ When I teach my class on science and religion, I usually begin by telling students (who are mostly future scientists and engineers) that my primary objective is to undermine to habitual perception of reality. I refer to this approach as the “Shock and Awe” strategy. Readers who are familiar with this phrase probably know it as a military doctrine that advocates the use of overwhelming force to demoralize the enemy. My interpretation of “Shock and Awe”, however, has nothing to do with warfare. I use this term in a way that is reminiscent of Niels Bohr's famous insight that “anyone who has not been shocked by quantum physics has not understood it”.

Quantum mechanics is by no means the only discipline that leaves us “shocked and awed”. Einstein's realization that spacetime is “curved” and “interacts” with matter has a similar effect, as do theories which suggest that all forms of matter and energy are actually composed of tiny nine – dimensional “strings". The mere possibility that nature could be organized in such an unusual manner inspires a sense of genuine wonder. This is precisely the kind of experience that theologians see as conducive to religious belief.

It is interesting to note that although some of these theories have been around for nearly a century, most people still tend to think of nature in terms of the classical Newtonian paradigm, which maintains that physical processes are generally deterministic and predictable (i.e., “well behave ”). What we have learned in recent decades suggests, however, that this is just the tip of the iceberg, and that physical reality is actually complicated, dynamic and messy, but often in a way that is strikingly beautiful. To this I might add the observation that although new facts about nature are being discovered at an ever increasing pace, its fundamental structure remains elusive, and our language for describing it appears to be hopelessly inadequate. The parallel with theology should be obvious, but in order to fully appreciate it we must first learn something about these counterintuitive scientific theories. That is what the first six chapters of this book are designed to accomplish.

__3. Building a “Modern” Theological Vocabulary__ In order to be intelligible (and relevant) to a contemporary audience, theology must constantly update its metaphors, and keep up with the “spirit of the times”, so to speak. If this is not done, theological terminology is likely to become outdated, and may lose much of its original power and meaning. When I first began to think about this question, I was reminded of a remark that my younger son made when he was in Kindergarten. As I was waking him up one morning, he voiced his displeasure by saying: “Give me a few minutes, dad - I am booting up.” If theologians wish to capture the imagination of his generation, I think they would do well to include some analogies from science and technology in their writings. That is precisely what I have tried to do throughout this book.

For this to be possible, however, it is necessary to have at least a rudimentary understanding of some of the more striking achievements of modern science. Those who make an effort along these lines will discover that some of these results are so unusual that they bring into question our most cherished beliefs about the nature of reality. This is a where science and religion appear to converge, since both claim (each in their own way) that reality is far more complex and mysterious than it seems.

#### How Might a Scientist Benefit from this Book?
Having spent a couple of pages discussing how a book like this might benefit readers who are interested in theology and the humanities, I must now say a few words about what it can offer to those who already possess a solid mathematical background. Chapters 7 - 11, which are devoted to aesthetics, ethics and theology, will allow technically savvy individuals to acquaint themselves with certain insights that are seldom discussed within the scientific community. Among these insights, I would like to single out three that are particularly instrumental in establishing a constructive dialogue between science and religion.

__1. The Role of Beauty in Science__ Although many physicists, mathematicians and engineers recognize the value of beauty in their work, relatively few among them actually ponder why aesthetic criteria provide such an effective framework for new discoveries. The fact of the matter is that we have no good reason to expect that our sense of beauty (which seems to be a subjective category of the human mind) should be an appropriate guide to “objective” truth. There is an element of true mystery to this phenomenon, which naturally invites a conversation with theology.

__2. The “Responsiveness” of Nature__ An additional impetus for a meaningful dialogue between science and religion is the assertion that physical reality appears to have a “responsive” side, which can be directly influenced by human decisions. Quantum mechanics has established, for example, that  if we choose to perform one type of experiment, an electron will exhibit the characteristics of a material particle. If, on the other hand, we elect to change the experimental setup, we can ensure that it will behave like a wave (which is very different type of “physical reality”). It seems, in other words, that we can determine which “face” nature will show us simply by choosing how we will observe it. If that is indeed the case, then there is clearly room for discussions that go well beyond mere theory and experiment, and delve into the very nature of reality. FOr those scientists who are open to religion, this realization is undoubtedly a welcome development (as are many other counterintuitive claims of modern physics). I strongly believe that the theological aspects of this book will provide such individuals with an appropriate framework for exploring the underlying metaphysical and spiritual implications.

__3. Scientific Metaphors as a way of Interpreting Theological Claim__ Even if we agree that theological insights can benefit open-minded scientists there is still a nontrivial language barrier that needs to be overcome. This barrier is a result of the fact that science and theology have been evolving independently, for a very long time, and have developed very different vocabularies. My own way of dealing with this problem has been to “translate” difficult theological concepts and interpretations into the more familiar language of mathematics and science. Over the past 15 years, such analogies proved to be extremely helpful, to the point that they have now become one of my most potent tools for bridging the two disciplines. I suspect that other scientifically minded individuals might find this methodology equally fruitful as they examine their own attitudes toward religion.

#### The Historical Context for This Book
In order to place this book into the proper historical context, it is important to keep in mind that I am by no means the first to suggest that science and religion are connected on a deeper level. The notion that these two disciplines are essentially inseparable has a long history, which dates back (at least) to ancient Greece and the school of Pythagoras. According to the Pythagoreans, mathematics was not just a way to understand nature, but also a key to recognizing certain profound spiritual truths. Numbers and geometric forms were believed to have a symbolic meaning, which points beyond the physical world" a transcendent and eternal reality.

Such views had a profound impact on western thought, and even inspired a "sacred geometry” that was subsequently used in the construction of many religious structures. The proportions of the Parthenon, for example, were chosen to emulate the so called Golden Ratio ($$\phi:\::1\approx1.6180339887...$$), which wo thought to be a number with a special mystical significance. Over the centuries, this ratio attracted the interest of many great thinkers, artists and scientists, including the likes of Leonardo da Vinci, Fibonacci, Roger Penrose, Le Corbusier and Salvador Dali (to name just a few). In his book The Golden Ratio, Mario Livio describes our enduring fascination with φ in the following way:

> “The fascination with the Golden Ratio is not confined just to mathematicians. Biologists, artists, musicians, historians, architects, psychologists, and even mystics have pondered and debated the basis of its ubiquity and appeal. In fact, it is probably fair to say that the Golden Ratio has inspired thinkers of all disciplines like no other number in the history of mathematics.”

Although science and religion continued to be intertwined throughout the Middle Ages, during the Renaissance these two disciplines began to drift apart. Perhaps the last great theologian who tried to fully integrate scientific and religious knowledge into a seamless whole was cardinal Nicholas of Cusa (1401 – 1464). In the course of his illustrious career, he wrote treatises on theology, philosophy, geometry, logic and astronomy, and was considered to be one of the most original thinkers of his time. He is perhaps best known for his studies of mathematical infinity, which foreshadowed the discovery of calculus, and even anticipated Cantor's ground-breaking work on set theory in the 19th century. Nicholas of Cusa was also one of the first to suggest that the earth is not the center of the universe and that heavenly bodies do not move in perfect circles. It is believed that this conjecture laid the foundation for the subsequent discoveries of Giordano Bruno (1548 - 1600) and Johannes Kepler (1571 – 1630), both of whom were familiar with his work.

What I find particularly interesting about Nicholas of Cusa was the way in which he used science as an analogical framework for interpreting religious teachings (an approach that I favor as well). Much of his theological work was based on the premise that human knowledge has fundamental limits, which neither science nor mathematics can overcome. We now know that such limits do, in fact, exist, thanks to recent discoveries in quantum mechanics, metamathematics and chaos theory. For Nicholas of Cusa, however, this was primarily a theological conjecture, which he justified analogically by comparing truth to the notion of mathematical infinity. He argued that both can be approximated, but never attained by finite means.

Sadly, such an “integrative” approach to knowledge has now been largely abandoned, and science and theology have evolved into very different (and seemingly unrelated) disciplines. This separation seems to be a perfect reflection of contemporary society. As philosopher Will Durant once remarked, we live in a Specialized world where it is good to “know more and more about less and less.” In such an environment, any form of integration across disciplines carries little weight outside academic circles, and even there, it is “unsafe” to venture too far beyond the boundaries of one's formal area of expertise. Whenever that is done, errors and misinterpretations become increasingly more likely. I do believe, however, that the time may be right to pick up where Nicholas of Cusa left off some five centuries ago. According to the British embryologist (and philosopher of science) C. H. Waddington:
	“The acute problems of the world can be solved only by whole men, not by people who refuse to be, publicly, anything more than a technologist, or a pure scientist, or an artist. In the world of today, you have to be everything or you are going to be nothing

If Waddington’s assessment is correct, it is reasonable to expect that the complexities of the modern world will force us to think once again in broadly interdisciplinary terms, and attempt to connect widely disparate fields of human knowledge (including, of course, science and theology). Perhaps this has always been a natural human impulse, which was held in check by our professional vanity and the fear of error. If that is the case, however, we must concede that these limitations are largely self-imposed, and that it is clearly within our power to transcend them. This may not be an easy thing to do, and may result in a few mistakes along the way But I have no problem with that. Ultimately, we can always respond to our critics with Woody Allen’s classic line from Annie Hall: “You mean my whole fallacy is wrong?”

#### How to Read this Book
As noted at the beginning of this Preface, Chapters 2 – 6 contain an overview of some striking and highly counterintuitive results of modern science. Those who feel that their technical background is “weak" might consider skimming through some of the more challenging material, and can focus their attention on the theological and philosophical questions that are addressed in Chapters 7 - 11. In examining these questions, I have used scientific results mainly as a source of analogies, which require only a rudimentary understanding of the underlying physical theories. This part of the book also includes a discussion of aesthetics and ethics (in Chapters 7 and 8), since these two disciplines are of significant interest to both science and theology. In these chapters I have tried to demonstrate that science and religion share certain fundamental values, which can sometimes counterbalance the profound differences that separate them.

It goes without saying, of course, that scientific analogies must be used with great care in theology, since religious truths cannot be reduced to formal laws or theorems. The following conversation from Huxley's Point Counter Point exposes the absurdity of such attempts.
	“This is me. Edward, I’ve just discovered a most extraordinarily mathematical proof of the existence of God, or rather of ...”
	“But this isn't Lord Edward,” shouted Illidge. “Wait. I’ll ask him to come.” He turned back to the old man. “It’s Lord Gattenden,” he said. “He’s just discovered a new proof of the existence of God." He did not smile, his tone was grave. Gravity in the circumstances was the wildest derision. The statement made fun of itself... “A mathematical proof,” he added more seriously than ever.
	“Oh dear!” exclaimed Lord Edward, as though something deplorable had happened. Telephoning always made him nervous. " hurried to the instrument. “Ah, Edward,” cried the disembodied" voice of the head of the family from forty miles away at Gatten"
	“Such a really remarkable discovery, I wanted your opinion on it, About God. You know the formula; in over nought equals infinity, m being any positive number? Well, why not reduce the equation to a simpler form by multiplying both sides by nought? In which case you have m equals infinity times nought. That is to sау that a positive number is the product of zero and infinity, Doesn't that demonstrate the creation of the universe by an infinite power out of nothing? Doesn't it?"
In writing this book, I have made a concerted effort not to sound like Lord Gattenden. It is largely for this reason that I decided to devote considerable attention to science and mathematics, and use them as an analogical framework for analyzing certain important theological claims. Most of the arguments that I have developed along these lines are confined to Christianity, for the simple reason that I am not sufficiently familiar with other traditions. In that sense, there is an autobiographical element to this book, since it represents a summary of the questions and possible answers that I have encountered in discerning my own faith (I am Serbian Orthodox). The nagging dilemma, of course, is whether I actually have anything new to say on these topics. That would be a tall order indeed, given that these issues have been explored for several millennia by minds far greater than my own. I am heartened, however, by the advice of C. S. Lewis:
	“In literature and art, no man who bothers about originality will ever be original; whereas if you simply try to tell the truth (without caring how often it has been told before) you will, 9 times out of 10, become original without ever having noticed it.”
I suppose that in the final analysis it must be conceded that very few among us are capable of generating completely new ideas. But what remains uniquely our own is the way in which we connect the existing ones.

#### Acknowledgements
My work on this book was supported by grants from the Center for Science, Technology and Society (CSTS) and the Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University. I am grateful to both Centers for their generosity and encouragement, and especially to Dr. Geoffrey Bowker (the former Director of the CSTS), whose openness to new ideas and willingness to promote interdisciplinary research have played an important role in this project.

A number of my colleagues read the manuscript (or parts of it) and provided many constructive suggestions. I am particularly indebted to the following individuals, whose varied expertise reflects the broad scope of this book. Ruth Davis (Computer Engineering), Timothy Healy, Radovan Krtolica, and Allen Sweet (Electrical Engineering), Betty Young (Physics), Tracey Kahan (Psychology), Mark Graves (Religious Studies), Andre Delbecq (Management), Alejandro García-Rivera (Jesuit School of Theology), Judith Dunbar (English), Lancelot Pereira, S.J. (Life Science and Biochemistry - Xavier Institute of Engineering, Mumbai) and Robert Audi (Philosophy - Notre Dame University). I also greatly appreciate the valuable feedback that I received from members of the reading groups in Theological Ethics, Mystical Theology and interdisciplinary Aesthetics, as well as the participants in the Ignatian Faculty Forum. Needless to say, the views and opinions expressed in this book are my own, as are any errors.

Finally, I owe a special debt of gratitude to my wife Jelena, who has been my greatest  supporter and toughest critic throughout this endeavor. She read countless versions of the manuscript and has helped make it far better than it originally was.
